# SEGA Mega Drive / Genesis hardware notes

 
This is a mirror from https://docs.google.com/document/u/1/d/1ST9GbFfPnIjLT5loytFCm3pB0kWQ1Oe34DCBBV8saY8/pub

 

 By Kabuto
 

 
 

 Written by Kabuto of TiTAN during the development of Overdrive 2

 Version 1.5
 

 

 
- Foreword
 
- The bus system
 
- The YM2612
 
- The VDP ports
 
- Picture size
 
- H/V counter values
 
- V28/V30 tricks
 
- Precise details of sprite rendering

 
- General
 
- Phase 1
 
- Phase 2
 
- Phase 3
 
- Phase 4
 
- Topmost and bottommost raster line
 
- Sprites beyond 80
 

 
- Memory access pattern
 
- Effects of 'disable display'
 
- Timing tricks with the H40 mode flags
 
- Address mapping
 
- 128 KB mode abuse
 
- Mode 4

 
- Uses
 
- Bus activity
 
- Broken plane B
 
- Broken H40 mode
 
- Palette
 

 
- Access timing
 
- DMA speed
 
- S/H
 
- The mighty debug register

 
- Terminology
 
- Debug register bits
 

 
- Debug display mode (combinations of bits 8,7,6)

 
- General
 
- Effects of bits 8 to 6
 
- Assumed technical background
 
- Border for S (sprites)
 
- Horizontal border for plane A/B
 
- Vertical border for plane A/B (also for disabled display)
 

 
- Debug register write glitches

 
- VRAM messup
 
- Sprite messup
 
- Read messup
 
- Pixel glitches
 

 
- Plane masking instability

 
- Observations
 
- Background
 

 
- Change list
 
- Footnotes

 
- #1
 
- #2
 
- #3
 
- #4
 
- #5
 

 

 
## Foreword

 

 This is the first of a series of documents about Overdrive 2
 and its development.
 

 

 This document specifically contains what I figured out about the Mega Drive
 hardware during the course of 4 years. Nearly all of this has been through
 running my own tests and guesswork, some information was gathered from the
 web and from discussions with others (I tried to cite everything correctly).
 

 

 I did not include information that is well documented elsewhere (e.g.
 how the CPUs behave).
 

 

 I hope this will be helpful for emulator and demo developers. And please
 fix your emulators, even for not so obvious issues (e.g. music playback)!
 My music player relies on the Z80 getting delayed for ROM accesses and
 plays samples too fast and distorted when it’s off, just using a default
 value of 3.3 should already do the trick here.
 

 

 Regarding all the VDP tricks used, these are of different complexities.
 Some (128k mode) are probably just a few lines of code, others (VDP debug
 register) maybe 100 lines of code; the most difficult thing to get right
 will probably be the twisters, they require exact DMA and FIFO stall
 timing, otherwise they will break. Also, when debugging overdrive 2
 effects, please ensure that the music is still running properly, if it
 isn’t the Z80 might as well be running around in the mapped ROM area and
 thus causing lots of 68k delays, breaking effects. At least that happened
 to me many times during development when I accidentally broke things.
 

 

 I need to thank all those people who pointed out that there is something
 (“$c0001c does weird stuff”) and spawned my interest to dig deeper, and
 those who encouraged me with their claims of something being impossible
 ;)
 

 

 The biggest part of this document describes the VDP since that’s what I
 spent most time on. Since all other parts are so much smaller I put them
 first.
 

 

 If you find anything wrong or have questions just post a message on
 the gendev forum or in #titandemo on EFNet.
 

 

 Happy coding!
 

 

 - Kabuto
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## The bus system

 

 When the Z80 accesses ROM the bus arbiter needs to pause the 68k, let the
 Z80 finish its request, then unpause the 68k again. Since all those
 components run asynchronously timing is barely predictable, also if the
 68k is just about to access the bus itself it finishes its own access
 cycle first before releasing the bus. This typically means that the Z80’s
 68k bus accesses will be delayed by 2 to 5 cycles. IIRC reads and writes
 behave exactly the same way. The average Z80 delay is around 3.3 Z80
 cycles, whereas the average 68k delay is around 11 68k cycles.[1] 

 

 If the Z80 tries to access the bus while the VDP is doing a DMA from
 RAM/ROM or the 68k is halted because it tried to read from the VDP while
 its FIFO is empty or write to the VDP while its FIFO is full it has to
 wait for that to complete first.
 

 

 IIRC If the Z80 tries to access ROM while the VDP is doing a DMA from 68k
 RAM this can lead to corruption of RAM contents due to glitchy signals on
 the address bus (similar to the C64’s VSP bug).[2] 

 

 The 68k is a bit slower than expected because something on the bus steals
 2 out of every 128 cycles. This is visible when measuring the bus because
 every time 128 cycles have passed the next bus access is slowed down by 2
 cycles. The slowdown even affects the Z80 if it happens to hit its ROM
 access. Interestingly if this hits when the 68k is writing to the VDP (no
 matter which port) then the slowdown doesn't happen. Tampering with
 internal registers didn't seem to affect this at all. And this doesn't
 seem to be the RAM refresh logic since RAM accesses get their own further
 slowdowns. (I did not try to investigate this further, I just noticed that
 code accessing RAM instead of ROM is slightly slower.) Maybe it's a
 leftover from development kits that are based on DRAM cartridges that need
 to be refreshed as well. After all these slowdowns the 68K seems to be
 running at roughly 480 cycles per raster line instead of the theoretical
 488+4/7 ones.[3] 

 

 I did not see hints of those slowdowns during DMAs, probably the VDP
 accounts for that itself by not fetching fresh data during DMA for 2
 consecutive cycles whenever it’s spending 1 internal cycle on VRAM
 refresh. For fast DMA this means that 10 slots are lost every rasterline
 (these are limited by how fast the VDP can fetch fresh data), for slow DMA
 (to VRAM in 64k mode) thus only 5 slots are lost (limited by how fast the
 VDP can write to VRAM).
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## The YM2612

 

 YM2612 registers $30..$FF are special as they only exist in a shift
 register that rotates all the time, but this also means that the YM2612
 must wait until it reached the desired register before it can overwrite
 it. That’s what’s limiting the maximum write speed to ½ the duration of a
 YM2612 cycle, or 33.6 Z80 cycles. Probably slightly more due to latching
 overhead. I.e. after writing a register value one needs to wait that long
 before writing the next register’s address.
 

 

 The YM2612’s busy flag is useless as already documented elsewhere.
 

 

 It’s not possible to reliably write both register number and data with a
 Z80 word write, that seems to be too fast for the YM2612.
 

 

 The YM2612 samples the PCM register once every cycle. The point in time
 when that happens differs between MD1s and MD2s I tested (and is different
 again in emulators, but unfortunately I can’t give any precise values
 here, I’d have to dig for my test code), it also seemed to be more stable
 on MD1 and varying a bit or sampled for longer than just an instant on MD2.
 

 

 I tried to account for both in my music routine to keep jitter down to an
 inaudible or at least barely audible level. And beware of the music
 routine in general, I developed it from scratch to support 26 kHz sample
 playback with nearly no jitter, and for that used every available trick.
 Also it reads the VDP’s V counter, make sure your emulator supports this
 when there are music issues.
 

 

 The DAC works a bit differently in MD1 and MD2. On MD1 it just outputs a
 short pulse for each voice, one voice after another in a cycle, on MD2 it
 holds the value for quite a while (but still just a fraction of that
 voice’s slot which is 1/6th of the YM2612 clock (about 53 kHz)). Maybe
 the YM2612 allows for replacing the DAC value for as long as the DAC is
 being held which would explain the behaviour seen on MD2s.
 

 

 To measure the audio quality I wrote an analysis tool that measures a
 number of parameters:
 

 
 
 
 

 The leftmost 2 diagrams are voltage levels of the DAC, first one with the
 9th DAC bit set to 0, second one with that bit set to 1 (that bit is
 normally set to 0 when playing PCM). As you can see there’s quite a jump
 of 3 samples between $7F and $80 (exactly in the middle) and a few further
 values are quite off too.
 

 

 The 3rd diagram measures frequency response from 0 to 26391 Hz. Blue is
 expected outcome, black is measured and red is noise floor. The way I
 measured this (playing white noise and phase correlation with measurement)
 allows telling apart signal and noise quite well.
 

 

 The 4rd diagram is the frequency response of a sine sweep. A bit of
 nonlinearities here, but nothing to worry about IMO. These might be due
 to DAC nonlinearities already.
 

 

 Now, for comparison, a MD2:
 

 
 
 
 

 Those jumps in the DAC are mostly gone and longer DAC output should in
 theory mean lower noise floor, but… the amplifier circuitry destroys it
 all, introduces severe nonlinearities, and instead of the MD1’s 1st order
 filter there’s a 2nd order filter for no obvious reason. Distortion is
 quite high too, very well audible.
 

 

 The MD2 sounds noisy, muffled and heavily distorted, I clearly prefer the
 MD1. I measured a few more MD1s and MD2s but their responses look pretty
 much like those shown here.[4] 

 

 I also tested the “loud PCM” debug bit. It amplified the volume around
 5-fold on MD2 as expected and about 30-fold on MD1 (which typically leads
 to heavy distortions as the MD1’s amplifier does not expect to see
 anything louder than all 6 FM voices being played at once at maximum
 volume).
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## The VDP ports

 

 The VDP’s command port is directly connected to its internal address
 buffer without any latching (or rather, the respective half thereof;
 after writing the 1st half of an address the next write will go to the
 2nd half unless you e.g. write to the data port first). However depending
 on the value written certain actions can be triggered:
 

 

 
- if the topmost 2 bits of the 1st half are 10 then this is a register
 write, the command port is not directed to the 2nd half, instead a
 register write is initiated (and executed after the next internal VDP
 clock = once every 2 pixels). So this way the command buffer serves
 as a latch.
 
- if bit 7 of the 2nd half is set this initiates a DMA.
 

 

 The address buffer is incremented after each VRAM/VSRAM/CRAM read or
 write (by adding the value from register $f). When writing a value to the
 VDP’s data port (or the VDP does that internally through DMA) both value
 and current address are appended to its internal FIFO, so the address is
 incremented immediately even if the VDP could not actually write the
 value to its memory yet. And if the FIFO was full then the CPU is blocked
 for a bit first. In either case this means that the CPU could not
 potentially access the control port while the VDP is incrementing it
 internally and cause any trouble… except for 2 corner cases:
 

 

 
- DMA fill/copy: these run internally in the VDP and the CPU is not
 blocked from accessing the control port. Sega already warned about
 leaving the VDP alone while such a DMA is ongoing.
 
- Setting up the VDP for read: after writing the read command the VDP
 will immediately fetch the desired value from its internal memory
 into a buffer (same FIFO? or separate?) for the CPU to read; once the
 CPU read that value the VDP reads the next value. And after each read
 it increments the address register. But especially when reading from
 VRAM (2 reads needed instead of 1?) and during active scan (VDP will
 need to wait until the next access slot) if the 68k immediately
 writes to the command port after reading a value from VRAM through
 the data port this can cause a conflict because the VDP will only
 increment the address after having fetched the next value; funny
 effects occur if the 68k tried to write to a 68k register, typically
 leading to the register number and value being ANDed with the address
 after increment, or with the address before increment and then
 incremented, before being used as new register number and value to
 write to. (Since a register write was already triggered by the 2
 topmost bits it doesn’t matter if ANDing alters these 2 bits, the
 register write will still occur.)
 

 

 Further notes:
 

 

 
- It is possible to make the VDP do a VRAM read DMA. Of course that
 does not make much sense and it does or does not crash depending on
 circumstances... 
 
- The claim I read elsewhere about CRAM DMA that's wrapping around the
 end of a 128 KB ROM “page” aborting automatically is definitely wrong.
 
- Writing to register $17 with bit 7 clear (highmost byte of DMA source
 address, pointing to 68k address space) seems to set a flag that's
 only reset when doing a DMA. Setting a VRAM address (for read or
 write) while this flag is set will crash the MD.
 
- Reading $C00018/$C0001C the usual way (move.w addr/(reg), dX) returns
 the following opcode as the 68k prefetches it before doing the actual
 read access in this case. Just every now and then, probably when
 there are bus delays / z80->ROM accesses, a value of $FFFF is read
 (due to bus pull-up).
 
- The upper 6 bits of the status register are also determined by data
 left on the bus, i.e. typically the next opcode’s upper 6 bits,
 sometimes just “1” bits.
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## Picture size

 

 Normally an image consists of the following raster lines:
 

 

 PAL: 38 border, 224 picture, 32 border, 3+3+3 sync, 10 blank = 294
 picture/border + 19 sync/blank = 313 total
 

 

 NTSC: 11 border, 224 picture, 8 border, 3+3+3 sync, 10 blank = 243
 picture/border + 19 sync/blank = 262 total
 

 

 (in 30 row mode the picture gets 8 more lines from each of the borders,
 i.e. 16 total)
 

 

 The horizontal image size is 13 additional left border pixels + 14
 additional right border pixels. Probably alike for H32 mode.
 

 

 Also, in H40 mode the VDP slows down its clock for a number of cycles
 during HBlank (32 pixel clocks according to my oscilloscope tests) -
 starting 24 pixels after the right edge (or 10 after the last rendered
 pixel), so doesn't affect visible pixels. It's just the actual
 hsync/colour-burst area that seems to be affected.
 

 

 Vblank is switched roughly 32 pixels before hblank starts. This means
 that the last hblank raster line has that number of valid pixels displayed
 at its end while the same number of pixels is missing from the end of the
 last raster line before vblank. Jorge suggests that this probably happens
 because the VBlank signal directly affects output and does not have to go
 through the long pixel pipeline first, and in interlace mode, for odd (or
 even?) fields the blanking at the bottom of the screen starts in the
 middle of the raster line, but the unblanking at the top still happens in
 the same spot.
 

 

 All blanking in HBlank and VBlank is done after palette lookups, so not
 even CRAM dots will appear in there.
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## H/V counter values

 

 (Source: https://gendev.spritesmind.net/forum/viewtopic.php?t=768)
 

 
 
HV counter values depending on horizontal resolution
 
 | Mode
 | H32 (RSx=00)
 | H40 (RSx=11)
 
 | HCounter progression
 | 0x00-0x93, 0xE9-0xFF
 | 0x00-0xB6, 0xE4-0xFF
 
 | VCounter increment
 | HCounter changes from 0x84 to 0x85
 | HCounter changes from 0xA4 to 0xA5
 
 | HBlank set
 | HCounter changes from 0x92 to 0x93
 | HCounter changes from 0xB2 to 0xB3
 
 | HBlank cleared
 | HCounter changes from 0x04 to 0x05
 | HCounter changes from 0x05 to 0x06
 

 
 
HV counter values depending on vertical resolution
 
 | Video
 | PAL V28 (M2=0)
 | NTSC V28 (M2=0)
 | PAL V30 (M2=1)
 | NTSC V30 (M2=1)
 
 | VCounter progression
 | 0x000-0x102, 0x1CA-0x1FF
 | 0x000-0x0EA, 0x1E5-0x1FF
 | 0x000-0x10A, 0x1D2-0x1FF
 | 0x000-0x1FF
 
 | VBlank set
 | Vcounter changes from 0xDF to 0xE0
 | Vcounter changes from 0xEF to 0xF0
 
 | VBlank cleared
 | Vcounter changes from 0x1FE to 0x1FF
 
 | F flag set
 | Hcounter changes from 0x00 to 0x01
 while VCounter is set to 0xE0
 | Hcounter changes from 0x00 to 0x01
 while VCounter is set to 0xF0
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## V28/V30 tricks

 

 The picture always starts at raster line 0. When switching between V28
 and V30 the only thing that changes are the raster lines in which to
 switch vertical border / vblank / vsync as you can see in the table above.
 

 

 When switching to V30 within active scan and back to V28 after line 224
 but before line 240 then the VDP will “forget” to start the vertical
 border and keep display active all the time. (This is similar to C64,
 except that while the C64 tests the border flag twice per raster line the
 VDP tests it constantly, so having V28 active for a single VDP cycle
 during line 224 or V30 for line 240 will start the border.) The resulting
 picture is still stable since vblank still works normally. This trick
 works on NTSC too, allowing for 243 instead of 224 vertical lines without
 a rolling picture.
 

 

 Sprites and HScroll work as expected in the vertical border area (though
 just the lowmost 8 bits of the raster line are used for HScroll lookup),
 also both planes work normally unless a plane size of 256x1024 pixels is
 used because the raster counter just uses 9 bits so graphics in the upper
 border will be vertically off by 512 pixels. (And this affects raster
 line 511 too which will be explained below).
 

 

 When opening the vertical border this way HIRQ runs continuously and is
 not reset before the start of each frame.
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## Precise details of sprite rendering

 
### General

 

 The VDP has an internal sprite cache that caches the Y and size/link
 fields of each sprite in order to quickly determine visibility of sprites
 without having to access VRAM. This is implemented as a write-through
 cache - the moment a write to VRAM occurs the VDP checks whether it goes
 to the current location of the sprite table, and if it does and affects
 an Y or size/link field then the respective cache table entry is updated.
 And this is the only way of updating the cache, moving the sprite table
 address will NOT update cache contents (so contents of the cache and
 underlying memory will differ). Also, this mechanism is sensitive to the
 entire 128 KB address range even in 64 KB mode, so when setting bit 16
 for the sprite table address but not for the Write/DMA target address (or
 the other way round) the sprite table in memory will get updated but the
 cache won’t.
 

 

 TODO what happens to the sprite cache when writing to odd addresses
 (64 KB mode)?
 

 
### Phase 1

 

 2 H-borders before the raster line to be rendered the VDP checks all 80
 sprites. It iterates over the cached portion of the linked sprite list
 (sizes and Y positions) using the link fields and identifies the first 20
 sprites that are visible by examining Y position and vertical sizes. The
 VDP iterates a maximum of 80 (64) sprites, starting with sprite 0,
 following the link attribute, potentially looping (if there's an endless
 loop) and rendering sprites multiple times (which normally has no actual
 effect, though), but a link attribute of 0 makes it stop scanning the
 list further instead of re-evaluating sprite 0.
 

 

 Every VDP cycle 2 sprites are checked, that means one sprite every pixel.
 This scanning seems to start 6 cycles after the first sprite tile fetch
 and continues for exactly 40 cycles. No sprites are checked while display
 is disabled, also during the access slot in the middle of sprite fetches
 probably no scanning is done either. Modifying the sprite table during
 this slot does not affect the first 34 sprites but only the 46 sprites
 after those. (It is difficult to exactly determine when those checks
 occur since they only use cached data, evidence gathered so far includes
 this access slot and display disabled behaviour, including disabling
 display for the very first sprite tiles fetches for which the number of
 available sprite slots is not reduced. Still there are some discrepancies
 such as why the numbers of access slots lost due to disabled display are
 not exactly identical for phase 1 and 3 when they should be.)
 

 

 The outcome of this phase is stored in a shift register with 20 slots
 containing numbers of sprites deemed to be visible - as long as the
 register isn't full yet, every time a sprite is determined to be visible
 it's shifted into the shift register from the right.
 

 
### Phase 2

 

 1 raster line before the VDP iterates over the visible sprites and
 fetches their X position and tile info. If there are less than 20 ones
 visible then they're checked late. For unused sprite slots sprite 0 is
 accessed but the data read is discarded. Furthermore, vertical position
 and size are fetched again from the sprite cache as well so they are
 evaluated twice per sprite and raster line.
 

 

 The VDP computes the address of the sprite row and stores it (14 bits)
 together with further info fetched (9-bit sprite X position, sprite size,
 palette, priority, horizontal mirror flag) in another 20-slot cache (TODO
 that cache has 34 bits per entry but so far only 31 bits are used),
 however this time it’s not a shift register but an indexed cache,
 starting at 0.
 

 

 The VDP just considers the lowermost 5 bits of the difference of sprite Y
 coordinate and raster line and adds it to the address of that sprite
 column’s top. This matters if the sprite’s Y coordinate is changed after
 it was determined to be visible in phase 1 - it is always rendered during
 this phase even if its new Y coordinate is no longer in range as if it
 was always 32 pixels high and just repeating after that. This for example
 means that sprite column 0 will always show tiles 0123 on top of one
 another in this order, repeating again and again, though normally the
 Phase 1 check will make sure only a subset, just as large as the sprite’s
 actual size, will be visible. I did not test vertically flipped sprites;
 according to Tiido for sprite height 1 these will show the column in
 order 0123 with each tile vertically flipped, for 2 tiles the column
 order is 1032, for 3 tiles the order is 2103 and for 4 tiles it is 3210.
 I am however not really sure about the first case since it’s a bit of an
 outlier, this should really be checked again.
 

 
### Phase 3

 

 In the horizontal blanking gap immediately preceding each raster line
 this will iterate over sprites fetched during phase 2 and for each sprite
 fetch as many tiles as needed, immediately rendering them into the 320
 pixel wide line buffer.
 

 

 This iterates over the sprite line cache that was filled during phase 2.
 It does not stop after the last slot that was filled during the previous
 step; it happily keeps on running ahead into unused slots, re-fetching
 data for the previously fetched sprite line (but discarding it). It can
 even run beyond sprite slot 20; cache slots 20 to 31 don’t exist and the
 VDP will fetch data from more or less random addresses (and still discard
 it of course). For slots 32 to 39 (the maximum the VDP can potentially
 access) it will re-access slots 0 to 7 since the counter is only 5 bits
 (and probably discard pixel data from those this time, TODO check) It
 seems to me like once a cache slot has been read its X address is set to
 0, thereby invalidating it, just in case it happens to be accessed again.
 

 

 For each such slot it will fetch pixel data from 1 to 4 tiles depending 
 on the sprite’s width.
 

 

 The line buffer sprites are rendered into contains 7 bits per pixel:
 colour (4 bits from tile pixel data), palette, priority. It was already
 initialized to be all zeroes during phase 4 rendering of the previous
 raster line.
 

 

 The VDP renders tile by tile into the line buffer. Only transparent
 pixels (i.e. the 4 bits that come from tile data are 0; palette and
 priority are ignored for this check) will get overwritten with the 7 bits
 from the current sprite. Normally this means that sprites that come
 earlier in the list win over sprites defined later, no matter what their
 priority is. Also, endless loops act as if they weren't there, because
 after one loop all non-zero pixels have already been written to the
 sprite buffer so rendering those pixels again won't have an effect (the
 sprite buffer kinda wins) and transparent pixels don't play a role (they
 will later be discarded after plane priority evaluation). However, with
 certain debug flags set, transparent pixels' palettes (and in S/H mode
 sometimes even their priority) play an important role because these are
 always overwritten so the sprite which contributes last wins. So there's
 a difference between endless and terminated linked lists in these cases.
 

 

 Also, there's a strange render bug. Rendering of further sprite pixels is
 disabled whenever a sprite is read from a cache slot with X=0 when the
 previous sprite read (no matter whether that happened on the same line,
 previous line or even a previous frame) had X != 0. Rendering is only
 re-enabled at the start of the next raster line. When there are less than
 40 sprite tiles on a raster line then further dummy sprites act as if
 they had X=0.
 

 

 This means that a sprite with X=0, following a sprite with X!=0, will
 hide all further sprites on the same raster line. If the first sprite(s)
 of a raster line has/have X=0 then the remainder of that raster line is
 only hidden if the previous raster line had all tiles in use and the last
 tile belonged to a sprite with X!=0.
 

 

 No idea about 32-col mode, didn't test. No idea really where that
 behaviour stems from. Only rendering is skipped - tile data is still
 fetched. And no idea how "stealing" sprite tile fetch cycles affects this.
 

 

 Also no idea why the VDP behaves like that at all. Maybe these flags were
 added as means for suppressing sprite rendering bugs and left over…
 

 

 How does rendering the sprite to the sprite buffer work? It needs to be
 very fast (one tile fetched every bus access = 2 cycles, that's all the
 VDP has for blitting the tile). My idea, supported by mode 4 bugs (see
 below), is that it's divided into 40 slots of 8 pixels each and connected
 with a parallel bus that feeds all pixels with fresh tile data.
 

 

 So upon reading a sprite tile line (pixels e.g. ABCDEFGH) the pixels are
 first rotated right to match the actual X position (so with X=2 this
 becomes GHABCDEF) and then put onto the parallel bus of the sprite cache
 for that access cycle. During the first half of that cycle the left half
 of that sprite is rendered by activating the 8-pixel slot you get by
 dividing X by 8, at the same time a bit-mask is applied to just write to
 those cells that need to be overwritten (here: 00111111 - this
 effectively writes ..ABCDEF with . meaning "don't write"). During the
 second half the next slot is addressed and the inverted bitmask is sent
 (here: 11000000 - writing GH......), so in total this writes the desired
 sprite data.
 

 

 How does this masking work? Upon activating a segment these bits are fed
 into a latch, combined with the incoming pixel data mask, and only those
 pixels that have both conditions met are overwritten. The combined pixels
 are re-written back into the buffer cell. This also means that
 transparent pixels are always written as well even though the VDP
 wouldn't have to.
 

 
### Phase 4

 

 In the actual raster line the VDP renders the sprite buffer as if it was
 just another plane (with priority and such).
 

 

 Mode 4 bugs reveal that the same addressing mechanism used for blitting
 sprite tiles into the buffer is also used for reading out pixel data
 again. At the start of every 8-pixel block that entire unit is read out -
 the pixels read out go into a shift register from which fresh pixel data
 is fed into the render pipeline. Clearing is done upon rendering the 7th
 pixel each, at least this is what I think based on certain bugs where
 disabling display for the last pixel of a raster line also seemed to
 disable clearing of the last 8 sprite pixels of that raster line.
 Clearing just sets all bits to 0.
 

 

 The sprite buffer is neither read nor cleared during vertical blank and
 while display is disabled.
 

 

 Tiido suggests that from his observations with display disabled in the
 middle of a rasterline that there must be 2 line buffers being used
 alternatingly, I however am a bit sceptical since some glitches I saw
 suggest that there is just 1.
 

 
### Topmost and bottommost raster line

 

 The VDP renders one raster line before the topmost one already in order
 to get sprites right for the topmost raster line, including the side
 border right before. This way it can do all the sprite processing steps
 needed for what's normally the first visible raster line. This raster
 line is normally invisible unless debug flags are used (see below). While
 I used to call it raster line -1 I now tend to call it raster line 511
 because that’s the internal state of the 9-bit raster line counter for
 that line and what’s used as offset for determining what graphics to show
 (and it does make a difference for planes that are 1024 pixels high as
 mentioned above).
 

 

 The VDP processes sprites for raster line 224 just normally during phases
 1 and 2, but then in the horizontal border following raster line 223 it
 just fetches 4 of its tiles during phase 3, then in the side-border
 preceding raster line 511 it resets the sprite cache index and renders
 the first 36 sprite tiles (and also does phase 1 processing for all 80
 sprites of raster line 0 there). Those sprite tiles are normally
 invisible (unless forcibly enabled using debug flags, see below); if they
 were forced visible then normally only the first 4 tiles will show, since
 their sprite cache slots will be marked as used by setting X to 0 which
 will normally disable sprite rendering before line 511. Unless, of
 course, if the last sprite tile fetched after line 224 belonged to a
 sprite with X=0, as then iterating over those disabled sprites won’t
 disable sprite rendering as this only occurs on transition from X!=0 to
 X=0, so the remaining sprites will appear.
 

 
### Sprites beyond 80

 

 Sprites >= 80 show weird behaviour. The VDP has no cache entries for
 those - during phase 1 it will try to latch non-existing Y/link/size
 values into its temp registers; this will cause the values from the
 previous sprite to be re-used, but bits (more or less) randomly drop off
 to become zero. So it will determine visibility possibly based on
 corrupted values and more or less randomly jump back to "ordinary"
 sprites. Also it will possibly enqueue a sprite index >= 80 for phase
 2. That phase will fetch pattern and X just normally, as if those sprites
 actually existed, just no idea what Y/size info is being used. Something
 weird seems to be going on here… I did some tests but this stuff is
 totally inconclusive so I do not include it here.
 

 

 In 40 column mode the lowmost bit of the sprite table address is ignored.
 In 32 column mode it is used, though the sprites 64 to 79 aren't totally
 ignored... Tiido pointed out that the VDP will still retain cached
 Y/size/link fields of sprites 64 to 79 from H40 mode and allow jumping to
 those and but fetch X and pattern fields for those from corresponding
 sprites 0 to 15 instead and show peculiar behaviour on which pixels are
 displayed. All this makes perfect sense when you assume that sprite
 Y/size fields 64 to 79 are only evaluated in phase 1, phase 2 which
 fetches sprite X and pattern from sprite 0 to 15 will also re-fetch
 sprite Y and size from just those sprites, leading to the effects seen
 which are similar to what would happen if you change a sprite’s Y / size
 fields between phase 1 and 2.
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## Memory access pattern

 

 The VDP does 210 accesses (171 in H32 mode) per line, one every 2 cycles.
 Each access is 32 bits wide (a smart decision by Sega's engineers, since
 that exactly equals a tile's row of pixels or 2 consecutive plane entries
 or a sprite's tile ref + x position or a raster line’s scroll data for
 both planes at once).
 

 

 Accesses are organized as follows:
 

 

 
- H = Hscroll
 
- AB = A/B tiles
 
- ab = A/B pixel data
 
- S = sprite tile/x
 
- s = sprite pixel data
 
- ~ = 68k access slot
 
- r = refresh
 

 
H40: Hssss AsaaBsbb ((A~aaBSbb)*3 AraaBSbb)*5 ~~ s*23 ~ s*11
H32: Hssss AsaaBsbb ((A~aaBSbb)*3 AraaBSbb)*4 ~~ s*13 ~ s*13 ~

 

 This explains the data seen in debug mode:
 

 
sHssssAsaaBsbb ... AraaBSbb~~ssssssss H40
~HssssAsaaBsbb ... AraaBSbb~~ssssssss H32
aa bb aa bb ... aa bb aa bb when data for each plane is read

 

 i.e. plane A: sprite tiles 0 and 1 beyond and (sprite tile 33 for H40 /
 DMA/refresh data for H32) and hscroll data before and plane B: sprite
 tiles 4 and 5 beyond and sprite tiles (36 and 37 for H40 / 28 and 29 for
 H32) before.
 

 

 When display is disabled the VDP still does those refresh cycles and uses
 all other cycles as access slots.
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## Effects of 'disable display'

 

 When disabling display with bit 6 of register 1 the VDP ceases to do all
 accesses since it provides nearly all of its internal accesses for data
 transfer. This has the following effects:
 

 

 
- The border stage is enabled (to hide bugs - but it is
 enabled/disabled a bit too early so bugs typically still show
 afterwards)
 
- Sprite pixel output is explicitly disabled (no idea why, as the
 border stage would already do the trick). Or maybe the VDP just stops
 retrieving data from the line buffer.
 
- ABab: the tile generator just uses the data that happens to be on the
 bus (typically data from the VRAM’s last accessed VRAM row when the
 VDP is idle, see below)
 
- r: As mentioned, refreshes are still done even during DMA
 
- S: Missing out on a S cycle seems to disable all following sprites on
 the same raster line. Even unused early S cycles cause this (S
 accesses are preferably done late)
 
- s: Missing out on a s cycle just delays the sprite operation until
 the next opportunity. This reduces the number of sprite tiles that
 can be fetched (also, the number of total sprites that are scanned
 during phase 1 is reduced as well)
 
- H: When missing out on an H cycle the VDP will just keep on using the
 previously fetched HScroll value.
 

 

 Thus, mid-raster line display disable is of very limited use
 unfortunately - it'll always break something, both tiles and sprites.
 Only in-border display disable seems to be useful, at the cost of losing
 sprites during phase 1 and sprite tiles during phase 3.
 

 

 Normally the VDP shows just border colour whenever display is disabled,
 in reality at least the tile planes keep on outputting whatever data is
 on the bus. The VDP forcibly enables the border for the duration of
 “display disabled”, but it gets both enabled and disabled a bit too early
 so the garbage data fetched does still show up briefly before the VDP
 resumes normal display.
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## Timing tricks with the H40 mode flags

 

 There are 2 bits that select either H32 or H40 mode. There are 4
 combinations:
 

 

 
- 0x81: H40 - one pixel every 8 cycles, but one pixel every 10 pixels
 during parts of hblank. Exact same raster line duration as H32 (3420
 master clock ticks per line)
 
- 0x01: fast H40 - one pixel every 8 cycles (3360 master clock ticks
 per line, 2% less than intended, still okay for most TV sets)
 
- 0x80: fast H32 - one pixel every 8 cycles (2736 master clock ticks
 per line, 20% less than intended, totally out of tolerance for all TV
 sets. AFAIK this won't switch to slow speed during borders like 0x81
 does.)
 
- 0x00: H32 - one pixel every 10 cycles (3420 master clock ticks per
 line).
 

 

 It is possible to quickly switch from 0x81 to 0x80 and back again.
 Depending on where in the line this is done various effects will happen:
 

 

 
- Timing instabilities (the line counter being thrown out of their
 regular values)
 
- Line doubling (VDP forgetting to increment line counter)
 
- Line crunching (VDP incrementing line counter twice)
 
- Various gfx bugs, some creating graphics in borders (no idea where
 the pixels to be seen there come from, doesn't seem to be the same
 thing the debug mode does), others black-out / corrupt some
 characters. Very often sprites are affected in a bad way (i.e. some
 or all of them being hidden).
 

 

 Switching H40 to H32 during the last 8 tiles which normally wouldn't be
 displayed on H40 seems to display some kind of garbage data, similar to
 fake H40 SMS mode.
 

 

 Toggling bit 7 (switching between counters) will force the VDP to switch
 between different clock sources which can mess up timing for a brief
 moment and can e.g. lead to VRAM corruption.
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## Address mapping

 

 Testing reveals that in each of the 3 different modes (64k, 128k, SMS)
 addressing is different.
 

 

 Address bits on wire are:
 

 
 
VRAM address line arrangement in each video mode
 
 | | Rows | Columns
 
 | SMS mode
 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4
 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8
 | 0 | 9 | A | B
 | C | D | E | F
 
 | 64k mode
 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5
 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
 | 0 | 1 | A | B
 | C | D | E | F
 
 | 128k mode
 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5
 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
 | 1 | A | B | C
 | D | E | F | G
 

 

 From the perspective of the program:
 

 
 
How VRAM address lines map to VRAM addresses
 
 | —
 | C7 | C6 | C5 | C4
 | C3 | C2 | C1 | R7
 | R6 | R5 | R4 | R3
 | R2 | R1 | R0 | C0
 | Mode 4
 
 | —
 | C7 | C6 | C5 | C4
 | C3 | C2 | R7 | R6
 | R5 | R4 | R3 | R2
 | R1 | R0 | C1 | C0
 | Mode 5 64KB
 
 | C7 | C6 | C5 | C4
 | C3 | C2 | C1 | R7
 | R6 | R5 | R4 | R3
 | R2 | R1 | R0 | C0
 | —
 | Mode 5 128KB
 

 

 In 64K mode column 0 (i.e. address bit 1) is inverted, the internal byte
 order of the VDP is the opposite of what the 68K sees. The VDP just
 emulates the opposite byte order through its interface, which also means
 that pixels aren't really stored in natural order internally. This
 explains a number of issues seen, for example why bytes written by copy
 commands are in opposite order, bit zero seemingly being swapped when
 using 128K and SMS modes. And all this was done just to provide seemingly
 correctly ordered bytes when used by the 68K which has a different byte
 order compared to the Z80. 
 

 

 Remarks:
 

 

 
- 128k mode: Bit 0 is used for selecting between the low and high byte
 = truly 16 bit wide accesses, as further tests revealed
 
- MD modes: The memory access granularity (when the VDP is fetching
 data from VRAM) is always 32 bits.
 
- SMS mode: address bits 14 and 15 are always 0. The VDP still always
 reads 32 bits at a time for graphics generation, just discarding the
 upper 16 bits, and glitches reveal that they are read from the
 original address plus 512 and they don’t wrap around when exceeding
 16 KB.
 
- Sources: https://gendev.spritesmind.net/forum/viewtopic.php?p=17583#17583 (for parts of the 64k mode)
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## 128 KB mode abuse

 

 Bit 7 of VDP register 1 enables 128k mode according to public documents.
 This bit changes the memory layout to enable the VDP to use 2 64K VRAM
 chips at once instead of just 1 VRAM chip as it does in 64K mode. While
 in 64K mode the single VRAM chip (only to some degree) holds 16-bit word
 after 16-bit word; in 128K mode each VRAM chip just stores one byte from
 each 16-bit word, so by setting the same address in both chips the VDP
 can read/write both bytes in parallel.
 

 

 128k mode behaves slightly different to 64k mode:
 

 

 
- write/DMA speed to VRAM increases to that of CRAM and VSRAM which is
 almost twice as fast for larger amounts of data (VRAM read speed
 might also improve but I didn’t test that since that’s rarely used
 and barely useful)
 
- bit 0 of write/DMA target addresses is ignored (in 64k mode it flips
 bytes of words to be transferred)
 
- bit 16 is no longer ignored (can be specified directly for write/DMA
 target addresses, tilemaps, scroll tables and sprite tables; can be
 specified indirectly through register bits for tiles). Please note
 that bit 16 is always checked for sprite cache updates, no matter the
 state of the 128k bit, as explained elsewhere.
 

 

 When enabling this bit with just 64K VRAM installed as typical for a
 regular Mega Drive, then just the lower byte of each word written to VRAM
 will get stored, the upper byte will get sent to the non-existing 2nd
 VRAM chip and get lost. The other way round, when reading, the VDP seems
 to see the contents of the lower byte for both lower and upper byte of
 each word read internally. 
 

 

 So setting this bit normally doesn’t make much sense since there’s hardly
 anything useful one could display on screen this way.
 

 

 However, for writing this is actually pretty useful, since it allows
 writing individual bytes in VRAM instead of just entire words. The main
 use is updating 2-pixel-wide columns of pixel graphics[5],
 but other kinds of data such as tilemaps and sprite tables can also be
 updated in meaningful ways by only updating either the upper or lower
 byte of each entry; all this is faster than the usual way of transferring
 all 16 bits in 64k mode (unless just a few bytes are transferred in one
 go) and for pixel graphics this also saves VRAM and/or additional CPU
 resources by not having to deal with the usual workarounds for updating
 single bytes.
 

 

 I call this trick byte-wide DMA. Of course it’s only useful during VBlank
 because having 128 KB mode enabled during active display would cause
 garbled display contents as mentioned above.
 

 

 Unfortunately the target address is not straightforward to compute since
 address bits are rearranged. Writes to address a in 128K mode end up in
 the 68k VRAM address (((a & 2) >> 1) ^ 1) | ((a & $400)
 >> 9) | a & $3FC | ((a & $1F800) >> 1), so by setting
 the DMA increment to 4 we can use this for updating every 4th byte, e.g.
 for vertical stripes in tiles. However contents within each 1 KB page of
 VRAM need to be written separately as when exceeding its bounds bit 10
 flips and that causes bit 1 of the actual target address to flip instead.
 And as mentioned only the lower byte gets written. And as mentioned above
 writing to odd addresses does not seem to have an effect at all (as if
 the lowmost address bit was just ignored).
 

 

 When using this take care of the sprite cache! If the formula above
 happens to spit out an address that happens to be covered by the sprite
 cache it will get updated of course. But the other way round this could
 potentially be used for updating the sprite cache faster than normally
 possible… even though the high byte is discarded it’ll still get written
 to the cache since the VDP has no clue that there are only 64 KB.
 

 

 Switching 64k mode to 128k mode while there is still unwritten data in
 the FIFO (easily possible with a register write directly after a DMA even
 during vblank) will lead to erratic behaviour. Maybe this only occurs
 when the FIFO was about to write the 2nd half of the next FIFO entry. I
 have seen behaviour from DMAs not working to data being written to VSRAM,
 that could have been due to leftover flags in FIFO entries.
 

 

 On Genesis 3 systems this trick works as well, just with a different
 remapping formula: use a^1 as target address (i.e. flip bit 0), use DMA
 increments that are multiples of 2 and don’t worry about 1 KB pages.
 That’s because Genesis 3 has a completely redesigned memory bus and 128k
 remapping was scrapped, but the other 128k mode changes are still in there.
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## Mode 4

 

 I did quite some Mode 4 testing but this was out of curiosity, none of
 this was done in Overdrive 2, because of lower palette resolution,
 potential timing problems (different hblank/vblank positions potentially
 throwing capture devices out of sync) and because I did not find a
 potential use case other than generating additional work for emulator
 developers ;)
 

 

 The VDP can be switched to Mode 4 which provides backward compatibility
 with games developed for the Sega Master System. It behaves quite
 differently in that mode, though this only sets the VDP's internals to
 mode 4, not the whole system - all other system components still act like
 they're in mega drive mode, also the VDP still expects 16-bit CPU
 accesses (unlike in real SMS mode where it expects 8-bit CPU accesses).
 Nonetheless, the meaning of many registers totally changes. All registers
 except for the 10(?) SMS registers are disabled, though values written to
 them before switching over are still retained and can cause various effects.
 

 

 I did not test this but DMA might be impossible too in SMS mode. Register
 writes still work like they do in MD mode (and SMS mode since the format
 is pretty much the same, just that it's 2 bytes instead of 1 word there).
 Also, DMA-specific registers are inaccessible in SMS mode.
 

 

 Pixels are arranged differently - while MD mode is pretty much linear -
 each byte holds 2 pixels - SMS mode is pseudo-planar - each byte holds
 one bit of 8 pixels each.
 

 

 Mode 4 mode only has a single plane (A) - although plane B is available
 using debug bits and full of glitches. Also, a broken H40 mode is
 available too.
 

 
### Uses

 

 Overall it seems like mode 4 is of little use.
 

 

 Mode 4 itself might be useful for planar mode tricks: switch the VDP to
 128k mode in VBlank (memory arranged almost the same as SMS mode, just
 shifted by 1 bit and high byte of each word discarded as usual), set
 interleave to 8, then we can actually DMA to a single bitplane!
 

 

 However switching modes is very tricky though, especially since video
 timings seem to be a bit different and might confuse TV sets and
 especially recording equipment. Also, RAM limitations (16 KB = only 458
 tiles available, e.g. in a 19 by 24 tile window). And other tricks might
 make the same effect well feasible in mode 5 instead...
 

 

 Broken plane B is of little use since normal mode 5 gives us similar
 possibilities with way less hassle - and H40 mode is pretty useless too
 (rightmost 8 tiles can't be used, only 4 sprites per raster line).
 

 

 Out of all the other tested bits, only interlace and X window size seemed
 to have an effect. Though interlace is useless (rolling picture, at least
 on PAL) and X window size is useless too (plane can be made wider than
 usual but not scrolled all the way due to only 8 bits of scroll-position;
 the entire plane buffer can't exceed 2 KB either and so the plane will
 wrap within the buffer before it even reaches the maximum scroll pos).
 

 
### Bus activity

 

 Using general VDP knowledge and all kinds of border garbage it's possible
 to determine roughly what's going on on the address bus:
 

 

 
- Y = sprite Y fetch (32 times, each fetch fetching two Y entries at
 once)
 
- A = Plane entry (tile index + attributes) fetch (1 word each)
 
- a = Plane tile pixels fetch (always groups of 2 since this fetches 8
 pixels, i.e. 32 bits, and a single access just retrieves 16 bits each)
 
- r = refresh or access slot
 
- . = unknown
 
- S = sprite tile index & x fetch (8 times, once for each visible
 sprite)
 
- s = sprite tile pixels fetch (always groups of 2; 8 such groups total
 per raster line)
 

 

 Info deduced from border / H40 and plane B bugs:
 

 |r |r |..|..|Y2|Y3|..|..|Y6|Y7|
(|A |..|a |a |)*32
 |..|..|r |r |..|..|s0|s0|..|..|S2|S3|..|..|s3|s3|

 

 My guess about the entire raster line (r* = unknown number of
 refresh/access slots):
 

|S4|S5|s4|s4|s5|s5|S6|S7|s6|s6|s7|s7| r*
|Y |Y |Y |Y |Y |Y |Y |Y |
(|A |r |a |a |A |Y |a |a |A |Y |a |a |A |Y |a |a |)*8
|r |r |r |r |
|S0|S1|s0|s0|s1|s1|S2|S3|s2|s2|s3|s3| r*

 

 Sources for my guess:
 

 

 
- TMS9918 info. That's what the SMS VDP was based on, I used it for
 deducing the timing of "y" accesses - and where in a line sprite
 fetches themselves occur.
 
- MD VDP. It's obvious that it never fetches pixels directly in the
 cycle following the pointer fetch, that'd probably be too early. That
 makes it easy to fill in missing sprite info fetches.
 

 
### Broken plane B

 

 The hidden plane B can be forced to be visible using the debug register -
 either exclusively or mixed.
 

 

 This plane B isn't a real plane, it just displays data the VDP happens to
 read anyway. It's plane B's pixel generator still running actively and
 rendering pixels.
 

 

 The additional data comes from how the memory unit works - it always
 reads 32 bits at a time, even though just 16 bits are requested and used.
 For each fetched word the additional 16 bits come from the original
 word's address + $200 (as seen from mode 4's memory scheme) - and this
 address does not wrap around $4000 but thus reaches a bit beyond.
 

 

 Plane B basically displays whatever data plane A's generator fetched that
 way for odd tiles, together with the mentioned extra word.
 

 

 Plane B scrolls exactly as plane A does - except that horizontal
 scrolling "jumps" when bit 3 changes, since e.g. when X scroll increases
 from 7 to 8 then plane A's generator will fetch another fresh tile at the
 left edge, so previously even tiles become odd and vice versa, thus the
 data plane B gets to interpret changes too.
 

 

 Plane B outputs its pixels with a delay of 8 pixel compared to plane A.
 

 

 For each such plane A column that plane B displays the following happens:
 

 

 
- Plane A's tilemap entry is consumed by plane B just as well. All of
 its properties (tile address, horizontal mirroring, vertical
 mirroring, palette (0 or 1)) work on plane B just as they did on
 plane A.
 
- The word read along with the tilemap entry ($200 bytes ahead) is used
 for the adjacent tile's attributes, but this tile is treated as one
 would do in mode 5 - X mirroring and palette (0 to 3) are read and
 applied to the second tile. Note that it still uses the first tile's
 Y mirroring and tile source since both these affect the address to
 read tile data from and that was already done by plane A.
 
- I didn't mention priority - it's probably read likewise, it just has
 no effect in those modes that show plane B.
 
- The first word of plane A's pixel data is used together with the word
 from $200 bytes ahead as pixel data for the first tile - however this
 pixel data is decoded in mode 5 style (planar mode). Likewise the
 second word of plane A's pixel data is used together with the word
 from $200 bytes ahead as pixel data for the second tile, again in
 planar mode.
 

 

 This "reading another word $200 bytes ahead" has 2 side effects. $200
 bytes ahead means 8 tile rows further down in the tilemap, and different
 reads of the same data use mostly different bits, but one bit is shared
 with different meanings:
 

8 rows up: -cc-x--- --------
this row: ----cyxt tttttttt

 

 Also, you effectively deal with 16 by 8 pixel tiles now - you can use the
 first 8 ones, then need to skip the next 8 ones, use the next 8 ones
 again, and so on...
 

 
### Broken H40 mode

 

 Timing behaves just like H32 with just 2 changes: it displays 320 pixels
 instead of 256, moves HBlank around and appends additional cycles to each
 raster line while all bus access timings remain identical.
 

 

 The biggest consequence is that the 8 additional tiles the plane
 generator outputs are bug-ridden since they don't show data intended to
 be used for planes but just display what just happens to be on that bus
 instead.
 

 

 Also, if there are 5 to 8 sprites to be displayed on a raster line then
 the first 1 to 4 of these sprites will happen to be rendered during
 active scan which leads to sprite display bugs.
 

 

 However the last 4 sprites to be displayed on a raster line are still
 totally fine - they are even no longer clipped off by the border at X=256
 and extend a bit into the area beyond. They just can't be placed there
 entirely since the maximum sprite X coordinate is 0.
 

 

 The additional cycles H40 mode offers to the VDP are left entirely
 unused. They probably just become additional access or refresh slots.
 

 

 Out of the additional 8 tiles, the first tile shows data from access
 cycles - it’ll just show further data from the same DRAM line the VDP
 fetched data from the last time (i.e. previously accessed address +
 offset, not wrapping around after address $4000). The second tile shows
 the pixels that were fetched for sprite slot 0, the third tile shows X
 and pattern fetched for sprite slots 2 and 3, and the fourth tile shows
 pixels fetched for sprite slot 3. The remaining 4 tiles just show idle
 DRAM data as well.
 

 

 The data of the 4 bugged sprites is written into the sprite buffer during
 active scan which leads to weird behaviour. These sprites don't show up
 at their intended X coordinate; instead they show up where they are
 prefetched, the last sprite extending all the way to the border,
 repeating again and again. Those prefetched sprites also overlap a bit,
 showing some pixel mess - there's likely some conflicts going on, but at
 least there don't seem to be flickering instabilities. Changing a
 sprite's X coordinate just "rotates" that sprite's pixels, i.e.
 increasing it in steps of 8 has no effects.
 

 

 This is probably due to how the sprite prefetcher works. It needs to
 quickly render pixel data into the sprite line buffer - tile pixel 0 is
 sent to line-buffer positions 0,8,16,24,..., pixel 1 to positions
 1,9,17,25,... and so on - to make sure sprite data shows up correctly the
 sprite tile's 8 pixels are rotated internally first before sending (e.g.
 X coord 1 -> rotate to the right by 1 pixel so pixel 0 gets sent to
 positions 1 (where it belongs) and 9,17,25... onwards too).
 

 

 Normally there's a mechanism in place that restricts sprite tile writes
 to the correct pixels, but this mechanism doesn't seem to work here for
 some reason I don't understand yet. Also, this probably means that sprite
 rows are cleared after being displayed, not before…
 

 

 However, all this feels a bit weird. Judging from similar sprite display
 bugs on other platforms this feels a bit like sprites aren't rendered
 into a line-buffer (maybe they are in mode 5) but instead are rendered
 from one buffer for each tile (or sprite?). This buffer would be
 initialised with the sprite's pixels, pre-rotated, and equipped with 2 X
 positions for a comparator for turning it on resp. off - and pixel lookup
 would be used instead of pixel shifting. This would somewhat explain the
 bugs we saw, but it's unlikely they did something like that for all those
 40 sprite tiles that could be visible at once in MD mode.
 

 

 Of course plane B and broken H40 mode can be combined to an even more
 useless mode, leading to a number of additional broken tiles for broken
 H40 mode too, which will (likely) use the (32-bit-extended) tile pixels
 fetched for sprites 0 and 3 and then just refresh data for additional
 columns.
 

 

 Sprites show up in a specific way. There are 8 columns next to the 32
 valid columns. Most pixel data fetched only shows up in the following
 raster line, not in the raster line where it was fetched.
 

 

 There's nothing special about column 32. Normal sprites can reach into it
 and won't get clipped off but that's it about it. Sprite 0 is rendered in
 column 33, both left and right half. Sprite 1 is rendered in column 33
 (left half) and column 34 (right half and left half). Something odd goes
 on with the right half. It is not just drawn normally, but also a "prior"
 draw occurs which happens early so it becomes visible in the previous
 raster line. It occurs for all sprite pixels for which the previous
 sprite didn't draw an opaque pixel. Pixels enabled that way (including
 transparent ones!) replace the pixels that would normally be output.
 Sprite 2 is rendered in column 34 (left half) and column 35 (right half
 and left half) and behaves like sprite 1. Sprite 3 is rendered in column
 35 to column 39 (both halves each) and behaves like sprite 0.
 

 

 Possible explanation:
 

 

 
- The sprite tile renderer keeps on drawing sprite data into the buffer
 even if there's no fresh data. Maybe because it normally doesn't hurt
 to do so. That perfectly explains artefacts seen for sprites 1 and 2
 (halved tile fetch speed -> VDP has enough time for drawing twice)
 and why sprite 3 is repeated all the way until the right border.
 
- During active scan the address generator that normally tells the
 target for a sprite tile in buffer is overridden by the sprite line
 buffer readout logic, so that means freshly fetched sprite data is
 not written where it belongs but into the buffer cell that has just
 been read out.
 
- Sprite 0 is fetched in the middle of column 33 after that cell has
 already been read out and cleared. So the writes that should split
 sprite 0's data among buffer cells both end up in buffer cell 33.
 
- Sprite 1's first write (left half) ends up in cell 33 because it
 occurs early enough - it is fetched just like an ordinary sprite and
 occupies pixels left clear by sprite 0; however the first write of
 its right half coincides with the readout logic switching to cell 34.
 The occupied pixel state of cell 33 is used for masking fresh pixels
 for sprite 1's right half which is laid over the pixels just being
 read out into the pixel output. After that cell 34 is cleared and
 then both halves of sprite 1 are then rendered normally into cell 34.
 
- Sprite 2's tile is fetched exactly 8 pixels after sprite 1's tile so
 it shows the same behaviour, just this time on cell 34 and 35.
 
- Sprite 3's tile is fetched right after sprite 2's tile. Both its
 halves are fetched into tile 35 first (into pixels not yet occupied
 by sprite 2 there), then its halves are fetched into tiles 36 to 39.
 No idea why these fetches never seem to coincide with readouts (that
 would definitely cause visible conflicts like it does for the
 previous sprites, at least some transparent pixels would overwrite
 pixels in the raster line on top).
 

 
### Palette

 

 When writing the palette for mode 5 in mode 4 then its bits behave as
 follows:
 

mode 5: ----bbb-ggg-rrr-
mode 4: --------bbg-grr-

 

 Back to top
 

 
## Access timing

 

 As seen above there are 18 access slots for a raster line in H40:
 

 

 
- 1 mid-sprite access slot - this one happens during hblank and it's
 thus invisible when used for palette writes.
 
- 15 mid-tiles access slots

 
- the first of those happens during hblank and it's thus invisible -
 it's also the first one a HBlank handler can reach (IRQ takes too
 long for reaching the mid-sprite one)
 
- the next one happens at the pixel with X=-3 (display area
 coordinates) and is thus mostly invisible on CRTs but well visible
 on modern capture equipment that doesn't cut off the overscan area.
 From that pixel position all further access slot positions can be
 easily computed using the access list above.
 
- All further 13 ones are well visible.
 

 
- 2 between-tiles-and-sprites access slots - these 2 are adjacent and
 well visible.
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## DMA speed

 

 DMA seems to always use the same speed, it doesn't matter whether DMA
 data is read from ROM or RAM. (But I forgot whether I tested fast modes.)
 

 

 There are only 2 kinds of transfers speed-wise: slow and fast ones.
 Writes to VRAM in 64k mode are slow, all other kinds of transfers (to
 CRAM, VSRAM as well as VRAM in 128k mode) are fast.
 

 

 Fast transfers cost words*2.4+5.6 68k cycles on top of what
 the actual 68k instructions cost.
 

 

 These ones are limited by how fast the video chip can fetch data - it
 fetches one word from RAM or ROM every internal cycle, except that it
 skips 2 internal cycles 5 times per raster line, whenever it does an
 internal refresh cycle.
 

 

 Slow transfers cost max(words*2.4+5.6, words*4.7-6) cycles
 on top of what the actual 68k instructions cost. These ones are clearly
 limited by how fast the data can be stored for more than 5 words because
 at this point the FIFO fills completely up. On the other hand the DMA
 ends while there is still data in the FIFO to be processed, this is why
 there are seemingly negative costs.
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## S/H

 

 S/H works as follows:
 

 

 
- If both A+B are low prio, the visible color becomes shadowed
 
- If S would normally be on top (because they are not hidden behind a
 plane and not transparent), the following happens:

 
- Sprite color 63: S is not drawn and the A/B/G color becomes
 shadowed if it isn't already
 
- Sprite color 62: S is not drawn and the A/B/G color becomes
 highlighted if it was normal and normal if it was shadowed
 
- Otherwise S is drawn normally, or dark when all 3 S+A+B are low
 prio and S is not of either of the colors 14,30,46
 
- The only real debug flag difference: In mode 0 1 0 (S-masked)
 transparent pixels of high-prio S on top of low-prio A+B make those
 pixels that would normally be shadowed normal again
 

 

 

 Assumed operation mode:
 

 

 
- While determining priority of sprite pixels with respect to the other
 planes, if the sprite plane would be visible and its sprite pixel
 value is 62 and 63, then its visibility is forced off again and
 depending on its value enable either shadow (63) or highlight (62)
 
- If both plane A and B are low prio and plane S is either inactive or
 low prio: enable shadow, disable highlight
 
- If the lowermost 4 sprite bits are 14: disable shadow
 

 

 Explanation:
 

 

 For getting there I used both occam's razor (i.e. the simplest
 explanation is the most plausible one and to be preferred) and sega's
 transistor razor (the less transistors a feature needs, the better).
 

 

 They probably started with the first line of this (certain sprite colours
 darken / brighten planes) - by itself this works pretty solid,
 effectively gives you sprites of 50% transparent black and white, except
 for the obvious sprite order/priority issues (since that semi-transparency
 is determined after combining all sprites all semi-transparent pixels
 will seemingly rip holes into underlying sprites - similar to how
 low-prio and high-prio sprites can have different order among themselves
 than they have to the planes).
 

 

 Then someone decided "oh, why shouldn't we be able to have darkened
 planes too!" but for some reason they did it as mentioned above, maybe
 because checking plane pixel values would have been too difficult at that
 stage.
 

 

 The way they did it, forcing "shadow" when both planes are low priority,
 would, however, inadvertently force all sprites dark as well, so they
 added an exception to that rule - don’t darken visible high prio
 sprites’s pixels (so low prio sprites could still get darkened when
 desired, but still with somewhat erratic behaviour since sprite darkness
 depends on plane tile priority, even when all plane tile pixels are
 transparent and thus normally wouldn't have an effect).
 

 

 But still there was an oversight. The first step can selectively darken
 or brighten pixels. Making pixels underneath sprite colour 63 (= darken)
 dark seems alright (dark stays dark), making normal pixels dark also
 seems alright (we wanted to darken, didn't we?), but forcing pixels that
 would normally be highlighted to dark seems a bit over the top, so they
 added another fix - making pixels that would both be darkened by plane
 priority and highlighted by sprite pixels normal again. Their thought was
 probably "disable shadow if we got the sprite colour corresponding to
 'highlight' - even in the corner case that sprites didn't highlight
 because they were hidden underneath a plane that plane must be high prio
 so it wouldn't be dark anyway and this stage would have no effect". But
 the way they implemented it, not checking the palette, forces sprite
 colour 14 of palettes 0 to 2 to normal even if they'd normally be
 shadowed. Maybe this is the victim of a plan change, they might have
 originally repurposed colour 14 and 15 of every palette and when they
 changed it to just palette 3 they forgot to update this workaround
 accordingly.
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## The mighty debug register

 
### Terminology

 

 
- A = Tilemap plane A (shared with window plane)
 
- B = Tilemap plane B
 
- S = Sprite plane
 
- G = Background colour (not a plane; displayed where none of the above
 planes is visible)
 

 
### Debug register bits

 

 
- 0: -
 
- 1: some effects on h/w (no immediate effect, but OD1 does not boot /
 Mega Everdrive enters into an endless CRAM DMA upon startup)
 
- 2: -
 
- 3: crashes when doing DMA; debug code hangs after about 4 word writes
 to VSRAM

 
- https://md.squee.co/VDP When set, causes
 streaks down screen as if there was a continuous 68k -> CRAM DMA
 

 
- 4: -
 
- 5: messes up addressing, VDP uses row address for column addressing
 too -> VDP sees just 256 bytes that repeat again and again; these
 are bytes 0..3, $410..$413, $820..$823, ..., $fff0..$fff3… I can’t
 make any guarantees since it’s ages since I did these tests.
 
- 6: disables display, but unlike clearing the official “display
 enable” bit setting this one just disables all 3 planes but does not
 allow for fast DMA.
 
- 7,8: these force one plane permanently active (01 = sprites, 10 = A,
 11 = B)
 
- 9: replace PSG output with the volume level of the channel selected
 by bits 10-11
 
- 10,11: select channel for bit 9 (00 = square 1, 01 = square 2, 10 =
 square 3, 11 = noise). Bits 9 to 11 discovered by oerg or jorge IIRC
 
- 12,13,14: Each of these bits “locks” one of the internal buffers that
 are used throughout sprite rendering so it keeps on outputting the
 same value all the time (typically the last addressed entry) and
 cannot be written to:

 
- Bit 12: locks the buffer that stores attributes of up to 20 sprites
 between phase 2 and 3. Thus, when even briefly locked during phase
 3, it will keep on re-using the same attribute set, fetching the
 same tile data again, but will stop displaying sprites as each
 entry can only be used once and is then disabled. Setting this
 briefly during phase 2 won’t update the previous now-disabled entry
 which will also inhibit rendering of further entries (except if it
 was entry 0, then the next entries can still be displayed if the
 last line’s tile slots were not in use).
 
- Bit 13: locks the linebuffer that’s written in phase 3 and
 displayed in phase 4. While activated during phase 3 it no pixels
 will get written to the linebuffer while activated during phase 4
 no pixels will get read and the remainder of the linebuffer will
 get thrashed (overwritten by a pattern repeating every 8 pixel,
 with not every pixel being overwritten, as if a global clearing
 mechanism was activated). Activating it during phase 3 and keeping
 it activated until phase 4 will repeat a group of 8 pixels as
 sprite data again and again, even across frames (probably the last
 8-pixel group that was written). Since it only affects the
 linebuffer all sprite memory accesses still occur as usual.
 
- Bit 14: locks the shift register that’s filled with up to 20
 sprites during phase 1 and is used for determining which sprites to
 fetch data for during phase 2. While activated during phase 1 no
 sprites are added to the shift register; while activated during
 phase 2 the same sprite is fetched again and again until it’s
 deactivated again. Setting it permanently can make a single sprite
 repeat all the way from top to bottom, being fetched for all slots
 during phase 2 and then fetched and rendered as usual during phase
 3 and 4. Setting it briefly during phase 2 can cause interesting
 effects because the shift register does not rotate fully and
 sprites can be left over for the next pass - phase 1 will NOT fetch
 additional sprites if the last slot is occupied by a sprite that’s
 left over from previous line(s) that was not shifted out due to
 messing with this bit
 

 
- 15: -
 

 

 Out of these bits 6,7,8 are the really interesting ones, the other bits
 didn’t seem to exhibit any useful behaviour.
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## Debug display mode (combinations of bits 8,7,6)

 
### General

 

 When talking about color I mean "effective color", i.e. pixel color +
 palette index * 16, yielding a value from 0 to 63.
 

 

 Normally you’re supposed to set bit 6 before playing with bits 7 and 8 to
 force one plane permanently active, i.e. full-screen and including all
 borders. Not setting bit 6 will activate the selected plane on top of
 what would normally be active, thus potentially leading to 2 planes being
 active at the same time and typically ANDing pixel values just prior to
 palette lookup. In this case I will call the permanently active plane the
 “masking” plane. Since it is permanently active background colour won’t
 show anywhere since there’s always at least a single plane active.
 

 
### Effects of bits 8 to 6

 

 
- 0 0 0: normal rendering
 
- 0 0 1: G only
 
- 0 1 0: S-masked
 
- 0 1 1: S only
 
- 1 0 0: A-masked
 
- 1 0 1: A only
 
- 1 1 0: B-masked
 
- 1 1 1: B only
 

 

 “X only” means that only that plane will be shown, including the border
 area which is full of glitches.
 

 

 “X-masked” means that plane X is forcibly enabled everywhere. The effect
 is that:
 

 

 
- in the border area or transparent areas where background colour would
 show plane X will show instead
 
- where plane X would normally show nothing special happens, plane X
 will still show
 
- where a different plane would show BOTH that plane and plane X will
 be active at the same time, their pixel values being ANDed prior to
 palette lookup.
 

 

 Another way of implementing is to force background colour to 63 and then
 AND the entire output of rendering everything normally with plane X.
 

 

 S/H works as usual, just render as usual, remember the S/H flags, then do
 the ANDing based on the foreground pixel, lookup the palette and then
 apply S/H. One special case: in sprite-masked mode transparent pixels of
 high priority sprites will make shadowed plane pixels normal again, this
 is because the debug flags force plane S to be permanently active (see
 S/H formula above).
 

 
### Assumed technical background

 

 
- Plane priority stage: determines which of the A,B,S planes shows
 (signals named a,b,s), outputs one bit for each (1 = show, 0 = hide),
 also outputs S/H state (named sh here)
 
- Border stage: when border is visible, display is cleared or debug
 mode flag 6 set: forces a=b=s=sh=0
 
- Debug mode flags 7 & 8: when non-zero, force one plane to be
 always visible (01 = S, 10 = A, 11 = B)
 
- Background flag deduce: g = !(a|b|s): background only shows when
 none of the other planes does
 
- Plane mixer: Mixes planes together, depending on their flags:
 (A|!a)&(B|!b)&(S|!s)&(G|!g)
 

 

 Cases:
 

 

 
- Normal operation: just as usual. One plane is deemed visible and
 shows, otherwise background does.
 
- Just bit 6 is set: just background, because all planes were set to
 not show
 
- Bit 6 is set, either or both of bits 7 and 8: forces one of the 3
 planes to be always visible so it always shows
 
- Bit 6 is not set, either or both of bits 7 and 8: forces one plane to
 be always visible on top of the normal picture - this explains the
 effect seen depending on what plane would be normally visible:

 
- background: plane that's forced visible shows, and background
 doesn't (because one plane is already visible)
 
- that plane: it's visible as usual
 
- another plane: both planes visible at the same time, so they're
 ANDed
 

 
- Mode 4: this explains why the normally non-existing plane B can be
 forced active
 
- This also explains why bit 6 disables s/h - it just does so as the
 border stage does, so bugs outside of the render area can't
 darken/brighten the border that shows there
 

 
### Border for S (sprites)

 

 If bit 8 is clear and bit 7 is set (S only or S masked) then horizontal
 and vertical border pixels will always use palette entry 0. 
 

 

 Raster line 511 however shows parts of sprites that would have been
 displayed in raster line 224 (see above), but of course the sideborder
 still uses palette entry 0 only. Since this is officially part of the
 border area sprites will show here exclusively without masking with tile
 planes in S-masked mode.
 

 
### Horizontal border for plane A/B

 

 
- As long as bit 8 is set plane A or B is shown instead of the
 backdrop, including the border area, where the VDP keeps on rendering
 whatever data is on the address bus as if it was plane data.
 
- First of all, the VDP naturally renders 2 more tiles next to the left
 border, also dubbed column -1, this is so there are additional pixels
 when scrolling the picture to the right. Depending on X scroll there
 are thus 16 to 1 pixels of further plane data in the left border and
 0 to 15 pixels thereof in the right border (both always sum up to 16).
 
- Beyond that, there's data being displayed the VDP just happens to
 fetch at that moment. To be precise, that is:

 
- Plane A, right border: sprite tile 0, sprite tile 1
 
- Plane B, right border: sprite tile 4, sprite tile 5
 
- Plane A, left border: (idle data or sprite 33 depending on mode),
 4 X scroll bytes (interpreted as image data)
 
- Plane B, left border: sprite tile 36, sprite tile 37
 

 
- Those 2 tiles named here are always coloured with the palettes of the
 last 2 tiles of the raster line just rendered of plane B (even when
 plane A only is shown)
 
- The VDP always fetches data for sprite slots; when no tile data is to
 be fetched the VDP will just fetch from the same address it fetched
 sprite pixels from the last time for that slot. I found an old note
 that states “but it can also happen that previously displayed tiles
 are shown again (test case with 20 sprites of width 1)” but this is a
 TODO for further research obviously
 
- Note that the sprite plane will never render any pixels in the
 horizontal border (just the artifacts from sprite tile fetching in
 planes A and B)
 

 
### Vertical border for plane A/B (also for disabled display)

 

 On top of the image area another dummy raster line (normally hidden by
 border) is being rendered, it contains a strip of tile data from just
 before the normal image data (except for planes 1024 tiles high, there it
 wraps around incorrectly and it fetches from a position offset by 512
 raster lines).
 

 

 In all other vertical border raster lines strange bugs appear. What we
 see here is caused by how the memory chips behave. They have 2 access
 ports, one for instructions and the other one just outputting data at
 high speed. Internally when the VDP requests access to memory contents
 the memory chip copies an entire row of data of 256 bytes into an
 internal buffer and keeps on outputting data from it onto the high-speed
 bus, one byte after another, looping around, never stopping.
 

 

 As mentioned below data isn't arranged linearly inside memory chips, in
 64 K mode each VRAM row contains 4 adjacent bytes, then the 4 adjacent
 bytes 1 kB ahead, always advancing in 1 kB steps after 4 bytes each and
 looping around when reaching the end of the 64 K memory space. So a total
 of 256 bytes (or 64 groups of 4 bytes each) is contained in each VRAM row.
 

 

 This explains the garbage we see: after the last normal bus access the
 memory chip just keeps on outputting data from that last accessed VRAM
 row all the time and the VDP doesn't care and just displays it. So what
 exact data is being displayed depends on the last ordinary bus access
 that happened, for the vertical blank area that is the last of the 4
 sprite tiles fetched after the last raster line. So if there are at least
 4 sprite tiles to be fetched for raster line 224 then the 4th of those
 determines what kind of data will be displayed in the vertical border.
 If not, then the 4th sprite slot will just do the fetch again it did the
 last time there were at least 4 sprite tiles in use in any raster line.
 

 

 Even though there are 64 groups the tile fetch pattern makes the VDP just
 use 2 consecutive groups out of every 8 groups fetched, i.e. 16 groups =
 128 pixels. Also, since the number of groups fetched per raster line
 divided by 8 yields a remainder of 2, the next line gets different
 accesses. In total 4 consecutive lines each have an pattern on their own,
 after 4 lines a total of 840 accesses (= 13*64+8) have been seen, so the
 pattern is shifted to the left by 16 pixels then.
 

 

 Writing to the VDP, no matter whether using DMA or writing the data port,
 does not affect the patterns as those rights happen entirely through the
 access channel while the high-speed data channel just keeps on outputting
 its buffer contents again and again.
 

 

 The sprite stage, however, does not render anything during side-borders,
 only for raster line 511 as explained above.
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## Debug register write glitches

 

 The debug register is not latched; the VDP samples the data bus too early
 so before fetching the intended value it briefly fetches whatever was
 left on the external data bus, causing a number of side effects. This can
 even happen when writing 0 when the previous value already was 0.
 

 

 When glitches do happen they can have a number of bad side effects:
 

 
### VRAM messup

 

 There’s a certain chance that writing the debug register leads to VRAM
 corruption. So I heavily safeguarded against that in Overdrive 2, rewrote
 VRAM after writing to $c0001c.
 

 

 My best guess why that happens is that bit 5 changes the behaviour of
 DRAM addressing and it can lead to short glitches on the VDP’s address
 bus which in turn can confuse the VRAM chips, make them address multiple
 rows at the same time and mix them up.
 

 
### Sprite messup

 

 When changing the debug register in the middle of a raster line this has
 a high probability of mostly destroying the contents of the linebuffer,
 e.g. setting most pixels to transparent. My best guess is that this
 messes with linebuffer signals and sends a short write pulse to all
 pixels or manages to drain linebuffer contents.
 

 
### Read messup

 

 Due to the address glitches mentioned above any data the VDP tries to
 fetch that moment can be messed up, leading to further side effects.
 

 
### Pixel glitches

 

 Writing the debug register can also cause a glitched pixel, similar to a
 CRAM dot.
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## Plane masking instability

 
### Observations

 

 During testing we noticed that a few mega drives don't behave as expected
 when plane masking through the debug register is used.
 

 

 Typical symptoms were that some pixels in regular horizontal and
 sometimes also vertical patterns didn't get ANDed as expected but either
 ORed (or just one source took precedence) or even picked up noise. Also,
 all those mega drives also suffer from palette corruption, where palette
 entries changed seemingly randomly.
 

 

 We have been getting a lot of reports from people running the demo that
 we are analyzing. It seems that the most problematic VDP chip is the
 original 315-5313 / 7101. Many of them, especially chips manufactured by Hitachi, exhibit this behaviour. A general
 rule of thumb is that VA4 and prior use this chip, while VA6 and higher
 use the 5313A or newer. However, this is unreliable as depending on
 leftover production lots of PCBs and chips, combinations such as VA4 +
 5313A or VA6 + 5313 can occur.
 

 

 Some chips are just a bit affected (you see a tiny bit of noise and maybe
 a palette change per second), others are heavily affected (even when
 rewriting the palette every vblank it's corrupted again at the bottom of
 the screen - this is what lead people to describe these bits as causing
 screen flicker when testing with Sonic).
 

 

 Bottom line this means that about 30% of Model 1 and very few Model 2
 systems will experience graphical glitches.
 

 
### Background

 

 The plane ANDing behaviour seems to stem from signals being mixed instead
 of using proper AND logic. Sega only intended one signal to be active at
 any given time (and that's also the case under normal circumstances) but
 using these bits above 2 planes can be active at the same time (but never
 all 3), leading to that mixing.
 

 

 On newer MDs this gives a clean and pretty useful AND operation. But on
 older MDs the result of ANDing 0 and 1 doesn't give a clean 0 but often
 something inbetween, which can even lead to metastability propagating
 into the following palette lookup stage. This can cause 2 palette entries
 to be accessed at the same time, and due to the way the palette lookup
 was implemented (always write back upon read) this will wire-combine
 their contents and write them back to one or both cells (which seems to
 be a bit random but with a tendency to AND values so black wins in the
 long term), maybe most of the time just one palette entry is copied to
 another one. Anyway, all this breaks palettes.
 

 

 Mixing sprites with any plane seems to create the most heavy bugs. Mixing
 plane A with plane B seems to be more stable in general (though we seem
 to have found a MD where mixing with sprites seems to be stable but
 mixing planes isn't).
 

 

 Regarding those patterns, there are bits of the VRAM address currently
 being accessed leaking into the mixing stage here. In one case it was
 like this: when address bits 3,4,5 are all 1 then mixing 0 & 1 (both
 ways round?) lead to 1 instead of 0, if bit 3 was 0 but bits 4 and 5 were
 1 then this lead to noisy behaviour. This seemed to affect palette index
 bits 2 and/or 3 only (= 4-bit pixel + 16 * palette number). Also this
 seems to be different on different MDs, seen lots of different patterns
 here. More tests are totally needed!
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## Change list

 

 To be extended whenever I find something new or someone points out
 something being wrong.
 

 

 
- 2017-04-19 Version 1.0: public release
 
- 2017-04-20 Version 1.1: minor changes, fixed an error in the 128k
 mode formula
 
- 2018-04-24 Version 1.2: minor changes, fixed 128k mode notes for
 Genesis 3
 
- 2018-05-02 Version 1.3: the VDP caches addresses and info for 20
 sprite rows to fetch, not for 40 sprite tile rows as I previously
 thought
 
- 2018-05-23 Version 1.4: fixed a mistake in S/H assumed operation mode
 
- 2018-05-25 Version 1.5: added details for debug flags 12/13/14
 

 

 Back to top
 

 
## Footnotes

 
### #1

 

 Different Mega Drives might have different delays; I don’t expect to see
 any major differences between MD1 and MD2 models, just MD3 models are a
 bit different due to their redesigned memory bus (I measured slightly
 less than 3 Z80 delay cycles on average, no idea about 68k delays).
 Anyway, here’s what I measured on my MD1:
 

 

 The 68k needs to release the bus first for the z80 to access it. If the
 next 68k access 2 cycles ahead or less or already ongoing the 68k will
 finish it first. (TODO test other 68k instructions as well). Thus there
 is an initial delay of 1 to 6 cycles. (Typically 1 to 4; up to 6 cycles
 if the last access is delayed by the refresh logic.) After the last
 access finished there's a delay of 3 cycles for the bus to be granted.
 The Z80 bus access itself can be delayed as well by what seems to be
 refresh logic (up to 2 more cycles). The access itself takes 2 cycles.
 

 

 Using constants a (time until 68k finishes its last access before
 releasing the bus (1 to 6; 1 to 4 if there are no refresh delays)) and b
 (2 if the z80->ROM access is prolonged by a refresh delay, 0 if not)
 we can thus compute:
 

 

 readdelay = a + 3 + b + 2
 

 

 Another ingredient is the "subcycle" (0 to 6), indicating how much ahead
 of the starting 68k cycle the z80's request was to begin with. From this
 we can compute the delay the z80 will get:
 

 

 Z80 delay = ((readdelay*7 + 4 - subcycle)/15
 

 

 This in turn can be used for computing the delay the 68k will effectively
 get before it can keep on doing its business again:
 

 

 68k delay = ((Z80 delay) * 15 + subcycle + 46) / 7 - a
 

 

 Note that this 68k delay includes refresh delays that apply to the z80's
 read (but would have happened anyway to the 68k) but it does not include
 refresh delays that applied to its own reads and thus postponed the z80's
 bus access.
 

 
### #2

 

 This is one of the reasons Sega advised developers to pause the Z80
 before doing DMA. I’m not doing that but instead I tell the music code on
 the Z80 to leave the bus alone as pausing would distort music... However
 the odds for this to happen are small, maybe once per day for a typical
 game, but some of my test code managed to trigger this glitch every few
 seconds.
 

 
### #3

 

 Jorge recommends to investigate the "memory mode" register at A11000.
 

 

 As far he remembers this register is nullified on TMSS systems, and only
 works on VA4s or earlier motherboards and when activated he saw that 68k
 performance was about 1/3 of normal speed as if dtack generation was
 delayed on purpose or something. Kabuto however didn’t see any effects on
 his VA6 system (pre-TMSS).
 

 
### #4

 

 Jorge guesses that this only applies to MD2s VA0/1/1.8 (these use LM324
 or BA10324AF opamps).
 

 

 VA2 and VA2.3 have discrete YM2612 and different audio amp (315-5684,
 also used in 32x).
 

 

 VA3 uses the same ASIC as VA0/1/1.8 but keeps the better mixing circuit).
 

 

 VA4 same as VA3, but more ASIC integration (68k and z80 now inside).
 

 

 Various users seem to be happy with VA3 & VA4 systems in terms of
 frequency response and PSG/FM level balance.
 

 
### #5

 

 Normally you can update no less than 4-pixel-wide columns of graphics;
 effects that need to update 2-pixel-wide columns would thus either
 combine 2 two-pixel-wide columns in RAM using the CPU or use 2 planes
 where each plane has only 2 relevant pixels out of each 4 pixels with the
 other 2 pixels being transparent to let 2 pixels; the other plane
 underneath has the same pattern of graphics, just shifted 2 pixels to the
 right, to make its relevant pixels fill the transparent gaps of the plane
 on top
 

 

 Back to top
